I'm asking God to come in my song. Come, come help me.
In this nation, we are only 800,000.
From 60 million, our people our culture, our ways are vanishing.
St. Joseph's Indian School provides an atmosphere-
a sanctuary-
where our beliefs
and way of life can not be practiced, but honored and gracefully passed on to the generations.
Living and following traditional ways
is different to everyone.
It's in your heart,
it's outside,
it's what somebody sees but also what somebody doesn't see.
Living your life traditionally might be
dancing at a powwow, might be speaking the language,
might be taking part in Sun Dance or another ceremony.
Living traditionally is different to each individual.
People not learning the ways, it's not in their homes
too much anymore, so it's getting lost at a faster rate
because of the, you know, drugs, alcohol, and a lot of the socio-economic things that happen on the reservation.
You know, a lot of the children are kind of being left
to raise themselves so they don't have that, that older generation to help them.
Plains Culture and how it is being lost
is a very sad thing.
We try to instill some type of culture in our students, as far as
so they can grasp onto a piece of culture, and that may
step them in the direction of living culturally
in their lives.
Living culture in their lives.
We all have to be involved and we all have to take the initiative
and we all do need to realize that the ultimate goal why were here
is because we're here for the children and we want them to progress and become
you know, just well-meaning citizens in our culture and our society so they can then
bring their children up.
The kids nowadays don't have that sense of identity, they don't have that strong culture behind them.
They don't have the language in their home, they don't have any of the culture in their home,
and if they do have it it's particularly only in their schools and I think they loose that sense of identity,
they don't know where they belong in the circle.
And I hope that the kids will understand
that their culture is good, their culture should be something they are very proud of.
And not just in that generality, but really connected to their heart.
That's my job- to connect teaching to their mind and their heart so that as they grow,
they'll continue to learn and continue to want to learn and be a part of their culture.